DERIVED TEXT-ONLY ACCESS COPY FOR THE LOCAL RCA TEST APP
Source: Energy Isolation Safety Standard CCS HSS STD 001.0, effective 2022-09-01.
Refer to the original controlled PDF for layout, approvals, figures, and current revision status.

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 1 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 1 of 52 
 
 
 CLEVELAND-CLIFFS STEEL 
 
Energy Isolation Safety Standard 
  
 
 
Effective Date: 
 
9-1-2022 
  
Supersedes:  
 
All Previous Versions 
    
Standard No.: 
 
CCS HSS STD 001.0 
    
Follow-Up Review Date: 
 
9-1-2023 
     
 
 
APPROVED 
 
K. Dirk Berard 
Senior Director Health Safety Security  
  
8/31/2022 
 
APPROVER          DATE 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Purpose/Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 2 
2 Responsibilities and Authorities ................................ ................................ .................... 4 
3 References and Definitions ................................ ................................ ............................ 8 
4 Resources ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................16 
5 Requirements ................................ ................................ ................................ .................17 
6 Forms and Documented Information ................................ ................................ ............43 
7 Opportunities and Risks ................................ ................................ ................................ 51 
8 Revision History ................................ ................................ ................................ .............52 
 
 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 2 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 2 of 52 
1 Purpose/Scope          
1.1 This Energy Isolation Safety Standard outlines the responsibilities 
under this standard, minimum verification procedure, training, and 
periodic inspection requirements to protect people from potentially 
hazardous energy when servicing or performing maintenance on 
equipment, industrial vehicles, and machinery. 
1.2 When discussing hazardous energy, we mean any energy that can be 
released and might harm a person, such as: 
 
Chemical 
Temperature 
Gravity 
Motion 
Mechanical 
Electrical 
Pressure 
Sound 
Radiation  
Biological 
1.3 These are examples of hazardous energy being released and causing 
harm.  
 While workers are repairing a connection in piping, somewhere upstream of that 
repair, another worker opens a valve sending fluids down the pipe that spills on and 
burns the maintenance workers. 
 When a conveyor jams, a worker reaches in to try to clear the jam, when the jam is 
suddenly and unexpectedly freed, the worker is crushed as a result. 
 While a worker is servicing a machine, the internal wiring in the machine shorts, which 
causes the maintenance worker to be shocked. 
1.4 Energy Isolation ensures these types of hazardous energy sources are 
isolated, controlled, or rendered in a zero-energy state to perform 
servicing or maintenance safely. 
1.5 This Energy Isolation Safety Standard applies to all Cleveland-Cliffs 
Steel employees, contractors, sub-contractors, service providers, 
vendors, and visitors when: 
 Performing servicing and maintenance on equipment, industrial vehicles, or machines 
in which the energization or startup of the machines or equipment, or the release of 
stored energy, could harm employees regardless of the length of the exposure. 
 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 3 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 3 of 52 
 Servicing and maintenance require the removal of machine guards or bypassing other 
safety devices. 
 Servicing and maintenance require personnel to place any part of their body into a 
point of operation, an area on a machine, a piece of equipment where work is 
performed, or into the danger zone associated with the machine's operation. 
1.6 This Energy Isolation Safety Standard does NOT apply to: 
 Work on cord and plug connected electrical equipment if the equipment is unplugged 
from the energy source, and the authorized employee has exclusive control of the 
plug. 
 Hot tapping operations. 
 Energized electrical work for purposes of diagnostic work. 
 Minor tool changes and adjustments and other minor servicing activities during 
normal production operations. 
 
 
 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 4 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 4 of 52 
2 Responsibilities and Authorities 
2.1 This standard was jointly developed with participation from the 
represented workforce and management. 
2.2 Cleveland-Cliffs Steel is responsible for: 
 Providing this This Energy Isolation Safety Standard. 
 Complying with the various provisions of Federal, State, and Local rules and 
regulations. 
2.3 Plant General and Health and Safety Managers are responsible for: 
 Establishing and maintaining guidance and implementation documents in compliance 
with this Standard. 
 Implementing the safety inspection process for new or modified equipment. 
 Audit for compliance with this Standard. 
 Ensuring lockout/tryout initial, annual and refresher training are available and 
conducted in compliance with this Standard. 
 Investigating all lockout/tryout near misses, incidents, and injuries. 
2.4 Division Managers are responsible for: 
 Ensuring that Section and Shift Managers are trained on all aspects of this Energy 
Isolation Standard. 
 Ensuring employees attend energy Isolation training. 
 Investigating all lockout/tryout near misses, incidents, and injuries. 
 Ensuring that each energy isolation verification procedure receives a periodic 
inspection annually. 
2.5 Section Managers (Operations and Maintenance) are responsible for:  
 Ensuring correct lockout devices are available to control hazardous energy 
successfully. 
 Ensuring that the energy isolation verification procedures are developed and 
maintained for jobs/tasks in their area of responsibility. 
 Authorizing new or changed energy isolation verification procedures and compliance 
with this Standard. 
 Ensuring new or transferred employees receive hands-on training. 
 Ensuring employees attend energy isolation training. 
 Investigating all lockout/tryout near misses, incidents, and injuries. 
 
 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 5 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 5 of 52 
2.6 Shift Managers (Operations and Maintenance) are responsible for:  
 Ensuring employees are trained on applicable energy isolation and verification 
procedures. 
 Shift Managers authorize group lockout leaders utilizing the energy isolation 
Authorized Employee Evaluation Form (CCS-HSS-FRM-0003.0). 
 Ensuring group and individual lockouts are performed when required. 
 Investigating all lockout/tryout near misses, incidents, and injuries. 
 Ensuring that employees, contract personnel, and visitors comply with the 
requirements detailed in this Standard. 
2.7 Employees are responsible for:  
 Reviewing and following energy isolation and verification procedures. 
 Signing on to a group lockout box control list. 
 Applying your personal safety lock to energy isolation devices, hasp, or a group 
lockout box. 
 Personal safety lock removal when appropriate. 
 Informing your manager if you have a concern with an energy isolation activity. 
 Compliance with the use of three-part communications. 
 Compliance with this Standard.  
2.8 A Group Lockout Leader is: 
 Experienced and knowledgeable of the machine/equipment operation. 
 Capable of recognizing hazardous energy sources, the type and magnitude of the 
energy available, and the methods and means necessary for energy isolation. 
 An authorized employee selected by their Shift Manager who meets the Group 
Lockout Leader evaluation criteria outlined in Form CCS-HSS-FRM-0003.0. 
 The above evaluation is one and done unless a periodic inspection, observation, or 
interaction reveals deviations or inadequacies in the employee's knowledge of Group 
Lockout Leader duties. 
 Trained to initiate energy isolation activities. 
 Trained to apply locks to energy isolation devices, perform second-person verification 
and try out equipment, 
 Trained to apply the control lock for the group lockout box and monitor completion of 
the group lockout box control list, 
 Not a permanent position unless the department makes it a permanent position. 
 Responsible for assessing the equipment, facilitating the group energy isolation 
verification procedure, maintaining continuity throughout the energy isolation and 
activity, and ensuring safe re-energization of the machine or equipment. 
2.8.1 It is essential to understand that the same person cannot apply the locks to energy 
isolation devices and verify the locks - Second Person Verification is required! 
2.8.2 Managers are to follow the training and retraining outlined in this document. 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 6 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 6 of 52 
2.9 A Second Person Verifier is: 
 Experienced and knowledgeable of the machine/equipment operation. 
 Capable of recognizing hazardous energy sources, the type and magnitude of the 
energy available, and the methods and means necessary for energy isolation. 
 An employee selected and trained by their Shift Manager, to perform the duties 
outlined in this document. 
 Managers are to follow the training and retraining outlined in this document. 
 Responsible for walking down each assigned energy isolation device required to be 
locked out according to the energy isolation verification procedure to assure 
equipment lock(s) were applied and secured to all identified energy isolation devices 
(Verify the Locks). 
 Not a permanent position unless the department makes it a permanent position. 
 Second Person Verification is required when multiple people, multiple energy 
sources, or group lockout boxes are used. 
 Lockout involving just one authorized individual for a single energy source requires a 
“Tryout” of the equipment but does not require second-person verification. 
2.9.1 It is essential to understand that the same person cannot apply the locks and verify the 
locks - Second Person Verification is required! 
2.10 A Tester/Tryout Person is: 
 Experienced and knowledgeable of the machine/equipment operation. 
 Capable of recognizing hazardous energy sources, the type and magnitude of the 
energy available, and the methods and means necessary for energy isolation. 
 An employee selected and trained by their Shift Manager to perform the duties 
outlined in this document.  
 Responsible for ensuring the area/equipment cleared of workers, the area cleared of 
tools/materials, machine guards reinstalled and secured, lockout device(s) removed, 
informs affected employees, operates equipment (Tries Out), and returns controls to 
the “off” or “neutral” position after the tryout. 
 Not a permanent position unless the department makes it permanent.  
2.11 Group Lockout Leaders, Second Person Verifiers, and Testers can 
be cross-trained.  
2.12 There shall be a master list maintained in each division of these 
authorized employees trained for group lockout leaders, second-
person verifiers, and testers. Use form (CCS-HSS-FRM-0004.0, 
energy isolation Training Log).  
 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 7 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 7 of 52 
2.12.1 Three-person example: Employee A (Group Lockout Leader) applies the locks, and 
Employee B (Second Person Verifier) walks down the unit and verifies the locks. Then, 
Employee C (Tester) tries out the equipment. 
2.12.2 Two-person example: Employee A (Group Lockout Leader) applies the locks, and 
Employee B (Second Person Verifier) walks down the unit and verifies the locks. Then, 
Employee A (Group Lockout Leader) or Employee B (Second Person Verifier) tries out 
the equipment. 
2.13 Responsibility for Lock Placement and Lock Removal 
2.13.1 The employee placing a personal safety lock on the energy isolation device is 
responsible for removing that lock. If the service being performed on the equipment 
has not been completed at shift change, or if the employee is called off the job, that 
employee must remove their personal safety lock(s). The incoming individual 
continuing the work must ensure that all energy sources are secured and properly 
locked out. 
2.13.2 If it is necessary to cut off a personal safety lock that an employee or contract 
employee failed or forgot to remove, approval must come from the Division Manager. 
A Safety Lock Removal Incident Report Form must be completed. 
2.13.3 A reasonable effort shall be made to contact the employee and ensure they are not at 
the worksite. This effort shall consist of: 
 Making phone or radio contact. 
 Checking clock-out records and sign-in sheets. 
 Thoroughly inspect the entire area to ensure the employee is not present. 
 If necessary to cut the personal safety lock, the employee must be notified before 
returning to work. 
2.13.4 Each employee is responsible for placing their personal safety lock on the correct 
energy isolation device or group lockout box. 
2.13.5 The ultimate responsibility to recognize, lock, try and ensure all hazardous energy 
sources lie within each person who might be required to apply or abide by the 
provisions of this Standard. 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 8 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 8 of 52 
3 References and Definitions 
3.1 References 
 29 CFR 1910.147 OSHA (Occupational Safety & Health Administration) Lockout 
Standard 
 ANSI (American National Standards Institute) Z244.1-2016, the Control of Hazardous 
Energy Lockout and Alternative Controls 
3.2 Definitions 
 
Alternative Controls (under the minor tool changes, adjustments, and minor servicing 
exemption): The means of controlling hazardous energy (other than energy isolation) to reduce 
risk to an acceptable level. 
 Alternative controls may include devices such as but are not limited to engineered 
systems such as light curtains, pressure mats, area scanners, hold-to-run devices, 
interlock switches, stop devices, trapped key devices, specially designed tools, 
remote devices, interlocked barrier guards, local disconnects or keyed control 
switches, restraint devices that prevent the employee from entering the zone of 
danger, and Plexiglas or other physical and substantial protective barriers in a fixed 
position preventing the employee's body from entering the machine hazard area and 
adjacent equipment that could cause harm. 
 Before energy isolation is implemented on a unit, all alternative control devices shall 
be checked and verified that the control keys, switches, or interlocks are in their 
proper position and the unit is in normal operations mode. This ensures that no 
alternative controls interrupt normal operation and do not interfere with the energy 
isolation and verification. 
Authorized Employee: An employee who locks out machines or equipment to perform 
servicing or maintenance. 
Affected Employee: An employee who is required to use machines or equipment on which 
servicing or maintenance is being performed under the energy isolation standard or who 
performs other job responsibilities in an area where such servicing or maintenance is 
performed. An affected employee becomes an authorized employee when that employee's 
duties include servicing or maintenance. 
Blind: Is the absolute closure of a pipe, line, or duct achieved by fastening a solid plate, 
threaded plug, or cap across its bore to cover it completely. The cover must:  
A.  At least cover the outer edge of a flange’s mating surface. 
B.  Be capable of withstanding the maximum upstream system pressure during normal 
operations.  
C.  Blinds include blanks, slip plates, blind flanges, threaded caps, and physical 
disconnects. 
 The three types of blinds utilized include: 
 
A.  Isolation 
B.  Hydrotest 
C.  Permanent Blinds must be capable of holding the maximum pressure and 
temperature to which the blind will be exposed. 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 9 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 9 of 52 
 Examples of acceptable handles are the “Spectacle,” "T handle,” or "J handle" design. 
 To eliminate the possibility of confusing restriction orifices with blinds, blinds with straight 
tabs must not be used. 
 
Figure 1 (above) - Blind-Flange Lockout Device 
 
 The crew securing the pipeline locks out upstream valves and then places a blank or 
blind in the system to positively block any potential downstream flow. 
 The flange bolts are then torqued to proper specification. At least one torqued bolt is 
covered with the blind-flange lockout device (see Figure 1 above). 
 The device is secured with one or more personal safety locks, or a group lockbox could 
be used. Multiple bolts could be covered using multiple devices if desired. 
Capable of Being Locked Out: An energy-isolating device is considered capable of being 
locked out if: 
 It is designed with a hasp or other means of attachment to which a lock can be affixed. 
 It has a locking mechanism built into it. 
 It can be locked without dismantling, rebuilding, replacing the energy-isolating device, 
or permanently altering its energy control capability. 
Control Lock (Group Lockout Box): A yellow, keyed lock having only one key is used to 
secure the group lockout box to provide continuity of a lockout for multiple energy sources, 
multiple crews, or across shifts. 
 Control locks shall be engraved with the division’s name and "Control Lock." 
Danger Zone: The danger zone is the machine’s point of operation area from which the 
operator must stay clear during the machine’s operation cycle to prevent injury (caught in, burn, 
shock, etc.). 
Energized: Machines and equipment are energized when connected to an energy source or 
when they may contain residual or stored energy. 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 10 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 10 of 52 
De-Energized: Disconnected from all energy sources and not containing residual or stored 
energy. 
Double Block and Bleed: Closing a line, duct, or pipe by closing and locking two inline valves 
and opening and locking a drain or vent valve in the line between the two closed valves. 
Energy-Isolating Device: A mechanical device that physically prevents the transmission or 
release of energy, including but not limited to the following:  
 A manually operated electrical circuit breaker. 
 A disconnect switch. 
 A manually operated switch by which the conductors of a circuit can be disconnected 
from all ungrounded supply conductors, and in addition, no pole can be operated 
independently. 
 A valve. 
 A block and any similar restraint device are used to block or secure stored energy 
sources or prevent equipment and machinery from accidental movement. 
 NOTE: Push buttons, selector switches, wall switches, and other control circuit type 
devices are not energy isolating devices. 
A. All energy isolation devices shall be labeled or marked to indicate their 
function. The identification shall include the following: 
1. Machine, equipment, or process supplied; and 
2. Energy type and magnitude. 
B. The marking shall be of sufficient durability to withstand the anticipated 
environment. 
C. The potential for injury and incidents may be reduced if employees are not 
expected to rely on memory as to which isolating devices apply, particularly in 
complex equipment. There is a greater potential for error when unlabeled or 
inadequately identified energy-isolating devices exist. 
D. Examples of marking and labeling include attached or embossed markings 
and signs such as: 
 “Main Breaker (480 V) Press 3” 
 “Natural Gas Shutoff (20 psi) Process Line 2” 
 “Drive Power Isolation (120V), Axis X, Only” 
 “High Pressure (600 psi) Return Line" 
E. Electrical boxes must be labeled directly on the box. Valves may be labeled on 
the valve body or a suspended durable sign or tag. Stencil, color, tags, or 
other methods may be labeled by constraints, blocks, chains, or pins. 
Energy Source: Any chemical, temperature, gravity, motion, mechanical, electrical, pressure, 
sound, radiation, biological, or other energy sources. 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 11 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 11 of 52 
Equipment Lock: A blue, keyed lock having only one key is used to secure an energy 
isolation device on machines or equipment. 
Equipment locks shall be marked with terminology matching the energy isolation device 
(e.g., #5 Scrap Baler Hydraulic Supply Valve).  
 Because energy isolation device terminology can be lengthy, it is permitted to number 
equipment locks sequentially if a legend exists describing each equipment lock, and a 
legend is provided with each energy isolation. 
 The energy isolation verification procedure can be the legend. 
 In place of marking equipment locks, a durable tag with a grommet can be attached to the 
shank of an equipment lock to identify the equipment lock. 
Grounding: Conducting connection between an electrical circuit or equipment and the earth. 
Group Lockout: A lockout that occurs when one or more employees perform servicing or 
maintenance on equipment with multiple energy sources simultaneously.  
Group Lockout Box: A storage device with a see-through front used in group lockout to secure 
all keys to the equipment locks secured on an energy isolating device(s) and permits all 
exposed persons to apply their personal safety lock. 
Hazardous Energy: Any chemical, temperature, gravity, motion, mechanical, electrical, 
pressure, sound, radiation, and biological or other energy can harm personnel. Some energy 
sources are apparent such as electricity, heat in a furnace, or something that might fall. Others 
may be hidden hazards such as air pressure in a system or a tightly wound spring. 
Hot tapping or pressure tapping connects existing piping or pressure vessels without 
interrupting or emptying that section of pipe or vessel. As a result, the pipe or tank can continue 
operating while maintenance or modifications are being done. The process is also used to drain 
off pressurized casing fluids and add test points or sensors such as temperature and pressure. 
 Hot taps can range from a ½-inch hole designed for something as simple as quality 
control testing to a 48-inch tap to install a variety of ports, valves, t-sections, or other 
pipes. 
 Hot tap operations that involve transmission and distribution systems for gas, steam, 
water, or petroleum products on pressurized pipelines, if continuity of service is essential, 
the shutdown of the system is impractical, documented procedures are followed, and 
employees are effectively protected by special equipment. 
Idled Equipment: Equipment no longer in use or will be out of service beyond a month. This 
equipment requires that a green lock be applied. 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 12 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 12 of 52 
 Do Not Operate (DNO) tags can no longer be used as the sole means for designating 
out-of-service equipment.  
Industrial Vehicles: includes all powered industrial trucks (PIT), fork trucks, tractors, platform 
lift trucks, trucks, cars, motorized personnel carts, material handling wheeled or tracked 
industrial vehicles, and other specialized industrial trucks powered by electric motors or internal 
combustion engines used exclusively in the industrial setting. The term "Industrial Vehicle" will 
mean all the above. 
Lockout: The placement of a lockout device on an energy-isolating device so that the 
device and the equipment being controlled cannot be operated until the lockout device is 
removed.  Lockout is not completed and ready for individuals to add their safety lock to the lock 
box until verification and try-out are completed and recorded on the energy isolation and 
verification procedure. 
Lockout Device: Any device that uses a positive means such as blank flanges, bolted slip 
blinds, and other devices to hold an energy-isolating device safely before a standard lock is 
applied, thereby preventing the energizing of machinery or equipment. 
 
 See Figures 2, 3, and 4 below for other lockout devices (e.g., electrical, motor vehicle, 
valve, cable): 
 
Figure 2 (above) - Example of Electrical and Industrial Vehicle Lockout Devices 
 
Figure 3 (above) - Example of Valve Lockout Devices 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 13 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 13 of 52 
 
Figure 4 (above) - Example of Cable Lockout Devices 
Lockout Hasp: A device that provides effective multi-person lockout on an energy isolation 
device or group lockout box (see Figure 5 below). Multiple personal safety locks can be 
applied to a lockout hasp, allowing a single energy isolation device to be isolated by more 
than one worker or multiple personal safety locks to a group lockout box. 
 
Figure 5 – Example of Lockout Hasp 
Energy Isolation) Verification Procedure: A written, standardized and controlled procedure 
prepared for a piece of equipment or process system detailing the correct lockout/tryout 
verification process for hazardous energy, including residual and stored energy (see form 
CCS-HSS-FRM-0001.0). 
Normal Production Operations: Utilize a machine or equipment to perform its intended 
production function. 
Other Employees: All employees who may be in an area where energy isolation and 
verification procedures may be utilized. 
Personal Safety Lock: A red, keyed lock having only one key and used only by the trained and 
authorized employee; the lock was assigned to ensure personal protection during lockout/tryout 
energy isolation activities. 
 Personal safety locks must be marked with the employee's name, payroll, clock, or badge 
number. 
 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 14 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 14 of 52 
Plug-Controlled Equipment: Cord and plug connected electric equipment for which exposure 
to the hazards of energization or startup of the equipment is controlled by unplugging the 
equipment from the energy source. 
Point-of-Operation: The area on a machine where work is performed upon the material being 
processed. The point of operation of machines whose operation exposes an employee to injury 
shall be guarded. 
Second-Person Verification: A second authorized individual (the Verifier) shall verify that each 
equipment lock is placed and secured correctly on each energy isolation device. 
 Second Person Verification is required when multiple people, multiple energy sources, or 
group lockout boxes are used. 
A. “Lockout-Verify the Locks-Tryout.” 
 Lockout involving just one authorized individual for a single energy source requires a 
“Tryout” of the equipment but does not require second person verification or an energy 
isolation and verification procedure. 
Servicing and Maintenance: Workplace activities such as constructing, installing, setting up, 
adjusting, inspecting, modifying, maintaining, and servicing machines or equipment, including 
lubrication, cleaning or unjamming of machines or equipment, and adjusting or tool changes 
where employees could be exposed to the energization or startup of the equipment or release of 
hazardous energy. 
Setting Up: Any work performed to prepare a machine or equipment to perform its normal 
production operation. 
Under Exclusive Control: The authorized employee would be able to prevent the equipment 
from becoming reenergized during their servicing or maintenance of the equipment. Plug-
controlled equipment is under the exclusive control of the employee if the plug is physically 
in possession of the employee, within arm’s reach and in line of sight of the employee, or if the 
employee has affixed a personal safety lock on the plug. 
Tags for Tagout: The placement of a tag only on an energy-isolating device is prohibited for 
energy isolation unless the energy isolation device does not accommodate a lock (see Section 
21). 
Tags for Lock Identification: 
 Substantial tags with grommets can be used on contractor personal safety locks for 
outages and travelers. 
 Tags can be attached to the shank of equipment locks if you choose not to engrave the 
equipment locks. The markings on the tag or equipment lock must be legible and match 
the identification of the energy isolation device. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 15 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 15 of 52 
Three-Part Communication: Anytime more than one person or crew is involved in a task that 
requires understanding and coordination between the two, clear and concise Initiate-
Acknowledge-Confirm (IAC) communication shall be utilized. 
 A key to excellent communication is establishing procedures and a culture that utilizes 
Initiate-Acknowledge-Confirm 100% of the time. 
 With three-part communication, a mishap can be avoided: 
Employee A – entry end operator: 
“Are your hands out of the way?” 
Employee B – removing equipment locks after a maintenance turn: 
“My hands are clear; go ahead and bump the mandrel rewind motor.” 
Employee A – entry end operator: 
“Your hands are clear; now bumping the mandrel rewind motor.” 
Tryout: Tryout requires that you physically attempt to turn on all power switches and devices 
once the equipment has been locked out. The tryout is your final check and assurance that the 
equipment has been isolated from all power sources. Tryout can be accomplished in the 
following ways: 
 Attempting to operate the equipment (manually shifting operating valves, turning on 
switches, etc.). 
 Visually verifying that needed safeguards are in place or that blades in the corresponding 
disconnect box are disengaged. 
 Using a voltmeter or other test device. 
 Some lockout/tryout activities will require all three tryout methods to ensure that energy 
sources are properly locked out. 
Zero Energy State: means a condition reached when all energy sources to or within equipment 
are isolated, blocked, or otherwise relieved with no possibility of re-accumulation. 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 16 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 16 of 52 
4 Resources 
4.1  
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 17 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 17 of 52 
5 Requirements 
5.1 Cleveland-Cliffs shall provide training to ensure that employees 
understand the purpose and function of the lockout/tryout energy 
isolation standard and that the knowledge and skill required for the 
safe application, usage, and removal of the energy isolations are 
acquired by employees. 
5.2 The Health, Safety, and Security Manager or designee will conduct 
initial training during new hire orientation.  
5.3 Next, hands-on training will be conducted by the employee’s Shift 
Manager and trained co-workers.  
5.3.1 This Energy Isolation Safety Standard will be presented at least annually during a 
safety meeting by an authorized manager.  
 Refresher training shall also occur when a periodic inspection reveals deviations or 
inadequacies in the employee's knowledge or use of the energy isolation verification 
procedure(s). 
5.4 Training shall include the following: 
5.4.1 Authorized Employees – Training in recognizing applicable hazardous energy sources, 
the type and magnitude of the energy available in their workplace, and the methods 
and means necessary for energy isolation. 
5.4.2 Affected Employees – Training will include the purpose and use of the energy isolation 
verification procedures. 
5.4.3 Other Employees – Training will include instruction on the energy isolation verification 
procedures and the prohibition relating to restarting or reenergizing machines or 
equipment which are locked out. 
5.5 Employee retraining is required: 
5.5.1 Whenever an employee is transferred, or there is a change in their job assignments (a 
position change that requires a new job orientation). 
5.5.2 Whenever a new hazard is introduced due to a change in machines, equipment, or 
process. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 18 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 18 of 52 
5.5.3 Whenever there is a change in energy isolation verification procedures. 
5.5.4 Whenever a periodic inspection reveals inadequacies in the company's energy 
isolation verification procedures or the employee's knowledge of the energy isolation 
verification procedures. 
5.6 This Energy Isolation Safety Standard shall be covered with 
employees yearly in a safety meeting(s). 
5.6.1 Training must be documented with the employee's printed name, signature, employee 
ID number, date of training, and the printed name and signature of the person 
conducting the training. Use Training Log (CCS-HSS-FRM-0004.0). 
5.7 Seven Steps to Safe Equipment Shutdown 
 The following procedure shall be utilized to lockout and try out hazardous energy sources 
to achieve a zero-energy state when performing servicing and maintenance so that 
maintenance and servicing can be performed safely. 
5.7.1 Hazardous Energy Assessment – Before beginning work on equipment, perform a 
TAKE 5 to assess the equipment to determine the energy sources and the appropriate 
energy isolating devices. 
 Assess potentially hazardous stored or residual energy and initiate measures to relieve, 
disconnect, restrain or otherwise render “safe” any stored or residual energy. Ensure re-
accumulation of stored energy is not possible. 
 Consult the applicable energy isolation verification procedure. 
5.7.2 Notification – Notify all affected employees that an energy isolation procedure will be 
utilized. Do not proceed with the lockout until authorized by the equipment operator(s). 
5.7.3 Shutdown – Shut down or turn off the machine or equipment using normal or 
emergency shutdown procedures established for the machine or equipment. 
5.7.4 Isolate – Physically locate and isolate all energy isolating devices needed to control 
the energy to the machine or the equipment. 
5.7.5 Lockout – Authorized employees shall place and secure applicable lockout devices to 
each energy-isolating device identified in the energy isolation and verification 
procedure. Place your personal safety lock on the lockout device(s), locking them in a 
"safe" or zero energy position. In the case of a group lockout, place your personal 
safety lock on the group lockout box. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 19 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 19 of 52 
5.7.6 Second Person Verification – Physically walk down each energy isolation device to 
verify that an equipment lock(s) is applied and secured correctly to each energy 
isolation device. 
 Second Person Verification is required when multiple people, multiple energy sources, or 
group lockout boxes are used. 
 Lockout involving just one authorized individual for a single energy source requires a 
“Tryout” of the equipment but does not require second-person verification. 
 Second Person Verification can be accomplished simultaneously after the equipment 
locks are placed and secured. 
5.7.7 Tryout – Before starting servicing or maintenance, ensure all employees are in a safe 
location. Tryout can be accomplished through the following acts: 
 Attempting to operate the equipment. 
 Visually verifying that needed safeguards are in place or that blades in the corresponding 
disconnect box are disengaged.  
 Using a voltmeter or other test device. 
 Some lockout/tryout activities will require all three tryout methods to ensure that energy 
sources are properly locked out. 
NOTE: If the machine/equipment operates or is not in a zero-energy state, notify your 
Shift Manager immediately and do not service or perform any work tasks on the 
equipment until isolation can be verified. 
5.8 Seven Steps to Safe Equipment Start-Up 
 The procedure listed below shall be utilized to return lockout equipment to normal 
operation safely. 
5.8.1 Inspect – Inspect the work area for personnel, ensure all guards have been reinstalled, 
all tools and materials have been removed, and the equipment is ready for normal 
operation. 
5.8.2 Notify – Notify all affected employees and operator(s) in the work area that the 
equipment will be reenergized. 
5.8.3 Complete – Complete the Post energy isolation activity checklist. 
5.8.4 Confirm – Confirm that all employees are in a safe location and clear from the 
equipment. 
5.8.5 Remove – Remove your lock and lockout hasp from the energy isolation device(s) or 
group lockout box or any blanks or blinds on piping. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 20 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 20 of 52 
5.8.6 Restore – Restore energy to the machine/equipment. Visually verify that the area is 
clear of personnel and tools and that guards are in place and secure before restoring 
energy. 
5.8.7 Inform – Inform all employees and operators that the equipment is ready for normal 
operation. 
5.9 Standardized Lock, Lock Purpose, and Lock Identification 
 RED = Personal safety locks (Cliffs and Contractor) 
 BLUE = Equipment locks 
 YELLOW = Control and cross locks for group lockout boxes  
 GREEN = Idled equipment locks (green locks are not to be used for protecting 
personnel performing servicing or maintenance) 
5.9.1 The standard lock for all Cleveland-Cliffs Steel: 
 An American Standard keyed lock. 
 Locks can have either 1-1/2 inch or 3-inch shanks.  
 Only used to secure hazardous energy sources (except green), and those locks shall not 
be used for any other purpose. 
5.9.2 There shall be no duplicate or additional keys for personal safety, equipment, or 
control locks. 
5.9.3 Any secondary keys must be destroyed. 
5.9.4 All attempts will be made to eliminate the ability to order locks with more than one key 
through procurement practices. 
5.9.5 The only exceptions to the standard lock and lock identification rule are designed 
energy control devices like the Kirk Key or Castell Locking Systems. 
5.9.6 Written permission from the Health, Safety and Security Department must be obtained 
before using such an energy control device. 
5.9.7 Personal Safety Lock: A red, keyed lock having only one key, used only by the trained 
and authorized employee the lock was assigned to ensure personal protection during 
lockout/tryout energy isolation activities. 
 Employees shall carry their personal safety lock while at work as part of their standard 
PPE (Personal Protective Equipment). 
 Each employee is responsible for keeping the key to their assigned personal safety lock 
in their possession.  
5.9.8 A personal safety lock shall not be applied or removed by anyone else.  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 21 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 21 of 52 
5.9.9 Personal safety locks must be marked with at least the employee's name and one 
other form of identification such as department name, department identification 
number, clock/badge number, or specific crew. 
5.9.10 Employees shall have possession of their personal safety lock key during the entire 
time they are locked out on a piece of equipment. 
5.9.11 At no time shall any employee enter a protected area without possession of a key that 
controls the energy sources. 
5.9.12 There is no limit to the number of personal safety locks an employee can be issued. 
5.9.13 Equipment Lock: A blue, keyed lock having only one key, used to secure energy 
isolation devices on machines or equipment to isolate energy sources following 
established, written energy isolation verification procedures.  
5.9.14 Equipment locks shall be engraved or have a durable tag with a grommet attached to 
the equipment lock shank with terminology matching the energy isolation device 
(example #5 Scrap Baler Hydraulic Supply Valve). 
5.9.15 Because energy isolation device terminology can be lengthy, it is permitted to number 
equipment locks sequentially if a legend exists describing each equipment lock. A 
legend shall be provided with each energy isolation. The energy isolation and 
verification procedure should be the legend. 
5.9.16 The corresponding equipment lock key number must match the equipment lock 
number. This is important so all elements of the energy isolation can be verified. 
5.9.17 The equipment lock key number must be visible from the outside of the group lockout 
box. 
5.9.18 It is permissible to attach a durable identification tag to the key to be visible outside the 
group lockout box. 
5.9.19 An equipment lock must be attached to each personal protective ground wire installed. 
The lock reminds you that ground wires are applied to crane hot rails or other devices 
to reduce the likelihood of powering on with the grounds still applied. 
5.9.20 Control or Cross Lock: A yellow, keyed lock having only one key used to secure the 
group lockout box to provide continuity of a lockout for multiple energy sources, 
multiple crews, or across shifts. 
 
 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 22 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 22 of 52 
 The control lock is applied to the group lockout box after all equipment lock keys have 
been placed in the group lockout box. Before applying personal safety locks, the control 
lock is secured on the group lockout box. The control lock shall not be removed until all 
personal safety locks have been removed from the box; therefore, the control lock is the 
first lock on the group lockout box and the last lock to be removed. 
5.9.21 All group lockout boxes at Cleveland-Cliffs Steel shall have a control lock applied.  
5.9.22 Control locks shall be engraved with the division name and "Control Lock." 
5.9.23 The control lock shall be identified on the Locked Key Box Control List by writing 
"Control Lock" followed by the authorized employee's name who placed the lock.  
5.9.24 When a shift change occurs, and the authorized person holding the control lock key 
needs to leave the facility, that control lock key shall be passed to the oncoming 
authorized person. In addition, the control lock shall be identified on the Group Lockout 
Box Control List by writing "Control Lock," followed by the new authorized individual's 
name who now controls the control lock key. The previous control lock entry on the 
Locked Key Box Control List shall be dated, time-stamped, and lined out by the 
outgoing authorized person (see Figure 6 below). 
 
 
Figure 6 (above) - Group Lockout Box Control List 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 23 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 23 of 52 
5.9.25 The passing of the control lock key and documenting the change of control for the 
control lock key continues as necessary (multiple shift changes) until the lockout/tryout 
activity is complete.  
5.9.26 The control lock key is the only key that may be passed from one authorized person to 
the following authorized person. A control lock shall be used on every lockout activity 
where a lockbox is utilized. 
5.9.27 Idled Equipment or Do Not Operate Locks (Green) locks shall be used only to control 
idled equipment and equipment you do not want someone to operate. 
5.9.28 Green locks are not to be used to protect personnel for servicing or maintenance. 
5.9.29 If the machine or equipment is going to be idled beyond a month, apply a green lock to 
the applicable energy isolation devices. 
 If you do not want personnel to use the machine or equipment, apply a green lock and 
“Do Not Operate” tag. 
5.9.30 All locks shall be purchased only through the approved safety vendor. 
5.10 Lockout Hasp and Group Lockout Box 
5.10.1 Lockout Hasp: A lockout hasp is a multiple lock device. 
 A lockout hasp is ideal when more than one person works on machinery or equipment to 
isolate a single energy isolation device. 
 The lockout hasp is attached to the equipment's energy isolation device, and each person 
locking out applies their personal safety lock to the lockout hasp. 
 A control lock is not required for a hasp unless a hasp is used on a group lockout box. 
 If you approach a lockout hasp and only one hole is remaining to place your personal 
safety lock, avoid applying your personal safety lock; instead, add another lockout hasp 
to that hole, and then apply your personal safety lock to the newly attached lockout hasp 
so additional personnel can apply their personal safety lock. 
5.10.2 There are situations where using a group lockout box is more practical than a lockout 
hasp, such as when multiple energy sources need to be isolated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 24 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 24 of 52 
5.10.3 Group Lockout Box (Figure 7, right): A container with a see-
through front used in group lockout to secure all keys to the 
equipment locks secured on an energy isolating device(s) 
and permits all exposed persons to apply their personal 
safety lock. 
5.10.4 Group lockout boxes are used when more than one 
employee and more than one energy source are isolated.  
5.10.5 Lockboxes shall be arranged, organized, and labeled regardless of whether they are 
mounted on the wall or placed near the locked and tried-out machine or equipment to 
create one convenient location for all involved to identify the lockboxes readily. This 
arrangement (see Figures 7 above and 8 below) is called a lockout station. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 (above) – This is the lockout box you see on the far left in Figure 7. This 
lockout box has hooks numbered to match each energy-isolation device to lockout 
equipment MD1. The hooks house an equipment lock (if not locked out) or the key to 
that equipment lock (if locked out). 
5.10.6 A Group lockout box's purpose is to ensure that the equipment lock keys cannot be 
accessed until the control lock has been removed. The control lock's purpose is to 
maintain the established lockout/tryout integrity during multiple shifts, shift changes, 
and throughout the lockout activity. 
 IMPORTANT: To maintain the integrity of an established lockout/tryout activity, a control 
lock shall be the first lock placed on a group lockout box after equipment lock keys are 
placed in the group lockout box and the last lock removed from the group lockout box. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 25 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 25 of 52 
5.10.7 Group lockout boxes must have a see-through face so that the number of keys and the 
identity of the keys is visible from outside the box. The see-through group lockout box 
requirement applies to all group lockout boxes (fixed location and portable) used at 
Cleveland-Cliffs Steel. 
5.10.8 Group lockout boxes must have the Group Lockout Box Control List attached. In 
addition, control locks shall be engraved with the division name and "Control Lock." 
5.11 The following steps must be followed when implementing a group 
lockout box: 
 As a job requiring a group lockout box is implemented, you must identify which energy 
control and verification procedures are necessary. The energy control and verification 
procedure will then be used to ensure the equipment is locked out and tried out correctly. 
5.11.1 Whenever a group lockout box lockout is implemented, a control lock shall be placed 
on the group lockout box to control access to the equipment lock keys. The control 
lock shall be the first lock-on and the last lock-off. 
5.11.2 The group lockout leader will determine which authorized employee possesses the 
control lock key (for the shift) for a group lockout box. Control lock keys shall not be left 
unsecured (e.g., in office drawers, etc.). 
5.11.3 The employee in possession of the control lock key is responsible for removing the 
control lock when: 
 The job is complete, and the post energy isolation activity checklist (CCS-HSS-
FRM-0005.0) is filled out, or when, 
 The lockout is being altered, requiring modification to the energy isolation 
verification procedure form or a new energy isolation. 
 Whenever a lock box is opened and a key(s) removed, it needs to be noted on the 
energy isolation verification procedure form immediately. 
5.11.4 If there are any alterations to an energy isolation activity related to the 
servicing/maintenance that affects the energy isolation and verification procedure (e.g., 
testing, changes in what is isolated, and change in scope of servicing/maintenance):  
 All changes made to the previously locked and tried-out equipment must be 
documented on the energy isolation verification procedure (CCS-HSS-FRM-
0001.0). 
 All personnel affected by the energy isolation activity are notified through a Job 
Safety Briefing, TAKE 5, or JJHAC. 
 All authorized employees re-applying their personal safety lock must re-verify that 
equipment that may affect their safety is locked out and tried out before returning to 
work by at least reviewing the energy isolation and verification procedure. 
 Do NOT assume you are still protected because you were protected when you first 
placed your personal safety lock on the group lockout box. 
 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 26 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 26 of 52 
5.11.5 Whenever a group lockout box lockout is implemented, and employees apply their 
personal safety locks for protection, the Group Lockout Box Control List shall be 
utilized to document who and when employees are locked out on the group lockout 
box and when employees remove their personal safety lock from the group lockout 
box. 
5.11.6 Two people, at minimum, are required when using the group lockout box system. 
 First, one authorized employee [A] shall place the equipment locks. 
 Next, another employee [B] verifies the placement of the equipment lock(s) 
according to the written energy isolation verification procedure. 
 Then, either employee [A] or [B] shall ensure the equipment is tried out. 
 Tryout can be accomplished through one or more of the following acts: 
 Attempting to operate the equipment 
 Visually verifying that needed safeguards are in place or that blades in the 
corresponding disconnect box are disengaged 
 Using a voltmeter or other test device 
 Some lockout/tryout activities will require all three tryout methods to ensure 
that energy sources are properly locked out. 
5.11.7 The identity of the equipment lock keys inside the group lockout box must be visible. 
5.11.8 A copy of the energy isolation verification procedure shall be placed outside the group 
lockout box in a document holder attached to the group lockout box for employee 
viewing.  
5.11.9 During shift change, the oncoming authorized employees shall ensure that the group 
lockout box is still in effect before placing their personal safety lock(s) on the group 
lockout box and starting to work. 
5.11.10 Before removing the control lock of any lockout/tryout scenario and releasing the 
equipment to operations, verify all work is complete, and a post energy isolation 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 27 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 27 of 52 
activity checklist is completed and signed by a Cleveland-Cliffs Steel responsible 
Manager. 
5.11.11 The completed post activity checklist (CCS-HSS-FRM-0001.0) must be returned to 
the Health, Safety, and Security Department for auditing. 
5.11.12 Any time a personal safety lock or equipment lock is placed on an energy isolation 
device (e.g., disconnect switch, valve, pin, etc.), it shall be locked in a manner to 
prevent removal without the use of excessive force or unusual techniques.  
5.11.13 Locks shall never be left on the energy isolation device, group lockout box, or lockout 
hasp while un-locked; they shall be placed and immediately locked.  
5.11.14 Equipment locks shall be returned to the designated storage location while not being 
used for lockout. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 28 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 28 of 52 
5.11.15 Keys for all equipment locks placed for lockout/tryout shall always be controlled. 
Equipment lock keys shall never be left unsecured in the group lockout box. 
5.11.16 Each energy isolation device on the equipment is secured with an assigned 
equipment lock by the Group Lockout Leader per the written energy isolation and  
verification procedure. 
5.11.17 An authorized employee(s) places each equipment lock key in the group lockout box 
after securing each equipment lock on the assigned energy isolation device.  
5.11.18 An assigned control lock is applied to the group lockout box by the Group Lockout 
Leader. 
5.11.19 The assigned control lock is the first lock placed on a group lockout box and the last 
lock removed from the group lockout box. 
5.11.20 Each authorized employee places their personal safety lock on the group lockout box 
established for the equipment to be serviced. 
 IMPORTANT: You must verify that you are placing your personal safety lock on 
the correct group lockout box or boxes. 
5.11.21 When work requiring lockout has been completed, the authorized employees remove 
their personal safety lock from the group lockout box.  
5.11.22 When energy isolation work is complete, the Group Lockout Leader completes a post 
activity checklist (CCS-HSS-FRM-0005.0). 
5.11.23 Next, the Group Lockout Leader removes the control lock from the group lockout 
box, freeing the keys to the equipment locks. 
5.11.24 For the Kirk Key and Castell Control Systems, follow the Risk Assessment, 
Practicality, and Justification requirements. 
5.12 Energy Control Verification Procedures 
5.12.1 Written energy control verification procedures shall be developed and maintained in 
each department.  
5.12.2 Energy control verification procedures shall cover the steps to ensure that the serviced 
equipment is isolated and secured from all energy sources, including stored or residual 
energy, which could injure personnel working on the equipment. 
5.12.3 Energy control verification procedures shall exist to lockout and try out machines, 
equipment, or operating units and be task specific. 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 29 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 29 of 52 
5.12.4 When using an energy control and verification procedure not written explicitly for a 
servicing or maintenance job/task, all energy-isolation devices not needed to protect 
authorized or affected employees shall be lined out and initialed on the energy 
isolation and verification procedure. 
5.13 Written energy control and verification procedures shall identify and 
provide information on the following: 
5.13.1 A specific statement of the intended use of the procedures. 
5.13.2 Type of machinery or equipment being locked out. 
5.13.3 Types of energy sources and magnitude, such as electrical (480v), pneumatic (35 psi), 
hydraulic, steam, etc., must be locked out. 
5.13.4 Method and location of the lockout. 
5.13.5 Location(s) where tryout takes place. 
5.13.6 The stored or residual energy sources such as capacitors, springs, elevated machine 
members, rotating flywheels, pressure in hydraulic, pneumatic, or steam systems, etc., 
must be controlled. 
5.13.7 Method and location to dissipate or restrain by grounding, repositioning, blocking, 
pinning, bleeding down, etc. 
5.13.8 If applicable, the method and location of lockout of the dissipating or restraining 
device. 
5.13.9 Method and location where tryout will take place. 
5.13.10 The method of verification that shall be used to assure that a Zero Energy State has 
been achieved and maintained for the machinery or equipment being serviced. 
5.13.11 Lockout involving just one authorized individual for a single energy source requires a 
“Tryout” of the equipment but does not require a written energy control and 
verification procedure. 
5.14 Troubleshooting, Testing, or Positioning Equipment/Machines 
5.14.1 In situations where lockout devices must be removed temporarily from the energy 
isolating devices and the machine or equipment energized to troubleshoot, test, or 
position the equipment or machine, the following must be observed: 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 30 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 30 of 52 
 Use three-part communication.  
 Survey and replace any missing machine guarding and clear the machine of tools and 
equipment that may interfere with its operation. 
 Make certain controls are in the neutral or "OFF" position. 
 All employees (affected, authorized, and others) are notified that the lockout devices will 
be removed and the equipment reenergized. All employees shall be located outside of 
the radius of movement of the equipment and in clear view of the point of control of the 
machine area. 
 Remove the lockout device(s) for the equipment sections to be checked. 
 Energize and proceed with the equipment's troubleshooting, testing, or positioning only 
while directly communicating with all the above employees. 
 When finished, shut down the equipment or machine, de-energize all energy sources, 
replace the lockout devices, and test operating controls. 
 Document the changes to the energy control and verification procedure immediately. 
 
 CAUTION: Automatic equipment has a built-in memory and, in many instances, 
may cycle or be activated when power is restored to equipment. 
5.14.2 Where equipment must be operated at intervals to complete repair work, energy 
control and verification procedures must be established to remove and replace lockout 
devices. 
5.14.3 There must be three-part communications between the persons removing the lock and 
operating the equipment and those at the equipment who may be aligning or 
performing other work in conjunction with the repair. 
5.15 Energy control of Piping Systems 
5.15.1 Before any piping system is opened, energy control and verification procedures must 
be established to safely reduce to a zero-energy state and verify that this has been 
done for the section being worked on. 
5.15.2 System shut down to zero energy state is always preferred. However, if the work to be 
done will affect the integrity of the system valves, blanks, blinds, or other controls, the 
system must be at zero energy. 
5.15.3 Blank, Blind, or bolted slip blind is acceptable if there has been no failure under the 
same or like conditions. 
5.15.4 Conditions for the use of Double Block and Bleed or Double Block and Vent: 
 The bleed or vent has been confirmed to be open visually, mechanically (rod), or by 
the flow. 
 Release from the bleed or vent will create no hazard. 
 System pressure will not exceed the rating. Piping system rated by pressure and 
temperature (most significant for steam). 
 The bleed-off vent is large enough to release pressure. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 31 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 31 of 52 
5.15.5 Conditions under which use of double block and bleed is not permitted: 
 There has been a previous failure under the same or like conditions. 
 System pressure is not known. 
 Piping rating not known. 
 The piping system is not rated. 
 The system is susceptible to hammering or other uncontrolled pressure surges. 
 There is no procedure for bringing a system up to pressure during startup. 
 There have been changes that could affect the flow of material made to the system 
since its last operation. 
5.15.6 Conditions for the use of a Single Valve: 
 System pressure will not exceed 75% of the rating. Piping system rated by pressure 
and temperature (most significant for steam). 
 No defects or problems are detected by careful inspection of the valve. 
 Stored energy and energy potential are extremely low/minimal, and the maximum 
system pressure does not exceed the rating. Piping system rated by pressure and 
temperature (Most significant for steam). 
 The material being valved off creates no significant hazard. 
5.15.7 Conditions under which use of a Single Valve is not permitted: 
 There has been a previous failure under the same or like conditions. 
 System pressure is not known. 
 Valve rating is not known, or the valve is not rated. 
 The system is susceptible to hammering or other uncontrolled pressure surges. 
 There is no procedure for bringing a system up to pressure during startup. 
 Significant changes have been made to the system since its last operation. 
 When the system contains acids, caustic or poisonous material of such strength or 
concentration, that contact can cause injury. 
 The Confined Space Standard requires blank, blind, spool, mis-align, plug or double 
block, and bleed for isolation. 
5.15.8 Start-Up of Equipment – A thorough inspection must be conducted to ensure all 
persons exposed to stored energy safety hazards are informed that the equipment is 
to be started. 
5.15.9 Ensure all employees are removed from the exposure before starting the equipment. 
5.15.10 Specify any other necessary steps which must be taken before equipment is started. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 32 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 32 of 52 
5.16 Periodic Inspections of energy control and Verification Procedures 
and Alternative Controls 
5.16.1 Periodic inspections of energy isolation and verification procedures and alternative 
controls shall be conducted at least once per year, and consist of the following 
required elements: 
5.16.2 Shall be performed by an authorized employee other than the ones utilizing the energy 
control and verification procedure or alternative measure(s) being inspected. 
5.16.3 Shall be conducted to correct any deviations or inadequacies identified during the 
inspection. 
5.16.4 Shall include a review between the inspector and each authorized employee of that 
employee's responsibilities under the inspected energy isolation and verification 
procedure. 
5.16.5 The periodic inspection findings shall be documented using the periodic inspections: 
energy isolation and verification procedure and alternative Control Form, CCS-HSS-
FRM-0006.0.  
5.16.6 All Operating Section and Shift Managers will be required to complete one periodic 
inspection of an alternative control per week where applicable. 
5.16.7 All Maintenance Section and Shift Managers must complete one periodic inspection of 
an energy isolation and verification procedure activity for every standard downturn and 
outage. 
5.16.8 All plant Safety Personnel will be required to complete one periodic inspection of 
alternative control or energy isolation and verification procedure activity per week. 
5.16.9 You may group distinct energy isolation and verification procedures associated with 
similar machines or equipment and consider the group of distinct energy isolation and 
verification procedures to be a single procedure for conducting a periodic inspection if 
the machines or equipment in the group have the same or similar types of control 
measures.  
5.16.10 You may elect to group energy isolation and verification procedures described above 
and then inspect a representative number of such employees implementing one 
procedure within each group. 
5.16.11 This approach is acceptable if the inspection sampling reflects division servicing and 
maintenance operations and hazardous energy control practices for the inspected 
energy isolation and verification procedure. 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 33 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 33 of 52 
 
 
 
 
5.16.12 The periodic inspections must contain at least two components:  
 An inspection of each energy isolation and verification procedure (or grouping), 
and  
 A review of each employee's responsibilities under the energy isolation and 
verification procedure being inspected.  
5.16.13 Each energy control and verification procedure (or grouping) must be inspected 
annually to ensure that the lockout/tryout verification program is correctly utilized. 
5.16.14 These inspections must demonstrate the energy isolation and verification procedures 
and must be performed while authorized employees perform servicing and 
maintenance activities on machines or equipment. 
5.16.15 The employee performing the periodic inspection does not have to observe every 
authorized employee implementing the energy isolation and verification procedure on 
the machine or equipment they are authorized to perform servicing and maintenance 
to meet the requirements. The inspector participating in the review when the lockout 
is used needs to: 
 Observe a representative number of such employees while implementing the 
energy isolation and verification procedure, and 
 Talk with all other authorized employees even though they may not implement 
the energy isolation and verification procedure. 
5.16.16 The periodic inspection is not required to be conducted in separate one-on-one 
meetings; it can involve the inspector meeting simultaneously with a group of 
authorized employees. Group meetings can be one of the most effective methods to 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 34 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 34 of 52 
conduct the inspection and clarify to the employees that they must follow the energy 
isolation and verification procedure carefully. 
5.17 Operating, Repairing, Servicing, and Inspection of Equipment 
5.17.1 Only a trained operator or maintenance person may energize/de-energize and operate 
a machine.  
5.17.2 Do not operate, repair or test any machinery, electrical apparatus, or other equipment 
unless part of your assigned duties.  
5.17.3 Do not lubricate, clean, repair, inspect or operate a machine you do not understand. 
When in doubt, ask your manager.  
5.17.4 If you are authorized to operate machinery, follow all safety procedures, including the 
JSA, JSHA (Job Safety and Health Analysis), Department Rules, and Manufacturer’s 
recommendations established for the machine or equipment. 
 
 
 
5.17.5 Authorized Cleveland-Cliffs Steel employees must perform the energy isolation and 
verification procedures including de-energizing, lockout, verification, and tryout before 
servicing and maintaining machines and equipment.  
5.17.6 All employees shall be trained on the energy isolation and verification procedures to 
ensure that each employee understands the purpose and function of this energy 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 35 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 35 of 52 
isolation standard and the knowledge and skills required for safe application, usage, 
and removal of energy controls. 
5.17.7 Operators of machines, cranes, and other equipment must secure the equipment 
under the established energy isolation and verification procedure or other procedure 
before leaving the job unless relieved on the job by another operator. 
5.17.8 Any unsafe machine to operate must be de-energized and locked out. Notify a 
manager of any broken or unsafe machinery or equipment. 
5.17.9 When opening an electric safety or disconnect switch:  
 Do not open under load 
 Stand to the side of the disconnect box, not in front of it 
 Turn face away from switch (reduce risk of being blinded or damage to breathing)  
 Hold breath (so if arc happens, you do not inhale liquid metal) 
 Close eyes (so if arc happens, you are not blinded) 
 Throw switch 
5.17.10 Contact your manager if it is impossible to stand clear from the front of the box. 
5.17.11 Only electrically qualified and authorized personnel are permitted to open a 
disconnect switch to verify that the knife blades are in the open position. 
5.17.12 Do not remove any personal safety lock unless you place it. Remove only your lock 
only after you are sure all personnel is in the clear.  
5.17.13 Do not remove a DANGER or CAUTION sign unless you placed it, and then only 
after you are sure the dangerous condition has been corrected.  
5.17.14 Contact your manager if a lock must be removed and the person who placed it 
cannot be found. The lock shall be removed by following Safety Lock Removal 
Incident Report Form (CCS-HSS-FRM-0007.0). 
 
 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 36 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 36 of 52 
5.17.15 Only authorized personnel can adjust machinery in motion with a written procedure 
approved by the plant General Manager and Health, Safety, and Security Manager. 
 If you are authorized to make minor production adjustments on machines, follow the 
procedures that have been approved. 
5.17.16 Be sure to guard against the movement of parts or machinery which might injure you 
or others. Energy control and verification procedures must be followed during the 
service or maintenance of the equipment. 
5.17.17 Machinery must not be operated if guards have been removed for repairs or 
adjustments. 
5.17.18 Do not remove locks or energize equipment until all guards and safety devices are 
correctly replaced, secured, and operable. 
5.17.19 Machine guarding and safety devices shall be affixed to the machine or secured 
elsewhere as designed by the equipment manufacturer and approved by completing 
an Equipment Safety Inspection and Startup Procedure Form. 
5.17.20 Pressure must be bled off before repair or service work on hydraulic, steam, gas, air, 
oil, water lines, or connected equipment.  
 Flow valves must be closed and locked, and pressure relief valves must be locked in 
the open position.  
 Accumulators must be discharged. 
5.17.21 Valve lockouts must be made following energy control and verification procedures 
before any repair or service. 
5.17.22 Before the flow of steam, gas, air, oil, or water is restored to a system, the person 
doing so must ensure that no one can be injured as the systems are activated. 
5.17.23 Use extreme caution when working around conveyor systems, especially conveyor 
belts.  
5.17.24 Do not shovel onto moving belts unless authorized by specific written procedures 
and all guarding is in place.  
5.17.25 Make sure the emergency stop is functioning correctly. 
5.17.26 Moving rolls shall not be touched by hand at any time.  
5.17.27 Work rolls shall not be cleaned or polished by hand in the mill and under power. 
5.17.28 If work rolls are installed in the mill and must be cleaned or polished by hand, they 
shall be locked out. 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 37 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 37 of 52 
5.17.29 Work rolls installed in the mill and moving or under power may be cleaned or 
polished under the following conditions: 
 Tools shall be provided to facilitate the cleaning or polishing of work rolls with the 
hands at a safe distance from the moving rolls.  
 A procedure directs using a tool(s) to keep hands away from the moving rolls.  
 The cleaning or polishing of the work rolls shall be performed at the side of the mill 
opposite the work roll's in-running nip point. If necessary, the direction of rotation of 
the work rolls may be reversed to eliminate the in-running nip-point hazard. 
5.17.30 The strip shall not be touched with any body part when moving under tension. 
 The strip may be positioned or worked on using extension/hands-free tools when the 
line is stopped or in jog mode. 
 Extension/hands-free tools shall be used when clearing jambs and removing scrap 
from the line unless the scrap has been cut into easily manageable, i.e., sample 
width or smaller, pieces. 
 A variance to this rule may be granted by the Plant General Manager and the Health, 
Safety, and Security Manager after all alternatives have been exhausted. In addition, 
a written safe procedure for performing the job must be developed. 
5.18   LOTO for Industrial Vehicles 
5.18.1 Any vehicle has the potential to contain various types of hazardous energy: 
 Mechanical hazards associated with start-up. 
 Mechanical motions due to moving power transmission components. 
 Mechanical hazards with disc brake springs and tire components. 
 Hydraulic hazards associated with fluid pressure and loss. 
 Gravitational energy from elevated vehicles and lifts. 
 Gravitational energy from elevated truck-mounted equipment such as dump beds. 
 Airbag explosion. 
 Electric battery shock, arc, or burns. 
 Fuel and fluid system fire or explosion. 
 Hot or cryogenic fluid and surface hazards. 
 Chemical energy (e.g., battery acid, coolants, lubricants, etc.). 
5.18.2 Before servicing an industrial vehicle, an initial step is to remove the ignition key from 
the ignition switch.  
 The repairperson shall maintain sole possession of that key, placing it in their pocket 
or a group lockout box if more than one person is servicing the vehicle. 
 Doors to the vehicle should also be locked. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 38 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 38 of 52 
5.18.3 If the above two steps are insufficient to prevent an engine from accidentally starting, 
the repair person shall disconnect the battery cables. 
 Disconnecting batteries is essential when working on or around cooling fans, which 
can automatically start up after removing the ignition key. 
 It is good to allow an engine to cool down sufficiently. Doing so will allow heat and 
subsequent pressure to dissipate, helping control those forms of hazardous energy. 
5.18.4 Depending on the type of vehicle being worked on and the service being performed, 
the repair person must either lower or block-up components held up by hydraulic 
pressure, such as dump beds and aerial lifts. It may also be necessary to chock or 
block wheels to prevent a vehicle from rolling. 
5.18.5 Dump beds can be incredibly perplexing. Manufacturer-provided props often do not 
provide the clearance necessary to perform many under-bed repairs. This incites some 
repair persons to create their support braces, many of which do not provide adequate 
protection.  
 The equipment manufacturer shall be contacted to discuss an alternative body prop 
or another suitable method to perform the work. 
 Remember that reenergizing a vehicle or component is often necessary for testing or 
troubleshooting.  
 A procedure that defines the sequence of actions necessary to accomplish the task 
safely shall be developed. 
5.18.6 It is imperative to check its service guidelines with the specific industrial vehicle 
manufacturer. Those service guidelines can double as guidelines to help develop 
energy isolation and verification procedures. 
5.18.7 Thorough energy isolation and verification procedures must be developed for shop 
equipment, including lifts, jacks, tire changers, wheel balancers, and pneumatic 
(compressed air) systems.  
 Procedures should be aligned with the equipment manufacturers’ service guidelines. 
 
 It is essential that the industrial vehicle energy isolation and training program helps to 
ensure that employees understand all relevant energy sources, methods of isolating 
or controlling those energy sources, and methods to verify effective energy control. 
Therefore, employee retraining may be necessary from time to time.  
 
 
 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 39 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 39 of 52 
5.19  Tagout Alternative/ Tagout System Limitations 
5.19.1 A tag must only be used instead of an equipment lock when there is no means to apply 
a lock. 
5.19.2 If a machine cannot be locked out, it must be tagged. If energy isolating devices 
cannot accommodate locks, a tag shall be used to warn employees that a machine is 
de-energized for servicing. 
5.19.3 The procedure for installing and removing tags is the same as the lockout procedure. 
5.19.4 Tags are only a warning device affixed to energy isolating devices and do not provide 
the physical restraint on those devices provided by a lock. 
5.19.5 When a tag is attached to an energy isolating means, it is not to be removed without 
authorization from the authorized person responsible. It is also never to be bypassed, 
ignored, or otherwise defeated. 
5.19.6 Tags must be legible and understandable by all authorized employees, affected 
employees, and all other employees whose work operations are or may be in the area 
to be effective. 
5.19.7 Tags and their means of attachment must be made of materials that will withstand the 
environmental conditions encountered in the workplace. 
5.19.8 Employees shall be made to understand that tags may evoke a false sense of security 
and their meaning need to be understood as part of the overall energy control 
program. 
5.19.9 Tags must be securely fastened to the energy isolating devices so they cannot be 
inadvertently or accidentally detached during use. 
5.19.10 Tags shall include the employee's name, division, and date. 
5.19.11 Like a lock, the tag must be securely fastened, in a position to be seen by all 
employees, and standardized. Therefore, the following safety tags (Figure 9) have 
been standardized, and no others are permitted to be used: 
 
Figure 9 (Above) - Approved Durable Tag with Grommet 


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 40 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 40 of 52 
5.20 Alternative Control - Requirements 
5.20.1 You cannot use control circuit type devices such as start/stop push buttons, e-stops, 
selector switches, presence sensing devices, or limiting switches instead of energy-
isolating devices for equipment lockout. This is because these control circuit type 
devices do not physically isolate equipment from the equipment’s energy source. As a 
result, unanticipated circumstances such as welded contacts or a loose wire shorting 
out can cause unexpected energization or startup.  
5.20.2 Under the “minor servicing,” circuitry meeting the control reliability requirements of 
ANSI Z244.1-2016 provides the alternative control measures required to control 
hazardous energy. 
 Control reliability is the capability of the control system and related interfacing to 
achieve a safe state in the event of a failure. 
 
 For example, an interlock or e-stop having a dual-channel (redundant) circuit with 
a self-monitoring safety module typically meets the control reliability 
requirements. 
 A basic start/stop circuit is equipped with a single-contact button (single channel), 
even though it may be “safety-rated” (positive contacts). 
 Due to the number of times the e-stop is cycled and the simplicity of the circuit, 
there are still several chances for a single component to fail, leading to circuit 
failure.  
 Because of the lack of redundancy and self-checking circuitry, this single-channel 
e-stop circuit is not considered control reliable.  
 
 If you are considering incorporating control reliable safety control circuits, a thorough 
practicability/justification analysis (CCS-HSS-FRM-0009.0), risk assessment (CCS-
HSS-FRM-0010.0), and other alternative control evaluations (see Appendix A) must 
be done to document and verify the necessary integrity and performance levels of the 
control system. This ensures you are providing equivalent and effective employee 
protection. 
 
 The machine supplier, competent machine integrator, or internal engineering delegate 
can only make the above control reliable safety control circuits determination. These 
persons can determine a machine’s performance level according to (EN) ISO 
standards which correspond to the machine performance level expectations. 
Machines with interlocks, e-stops, or presence sensing technologies have an up-to-
date (no significant changes made to machine or wiring) machine performance level 
review on file.  
5.20.3 The exemption for minor tool changes and adjustments and other minor servicing 
activities is a unique situation and shall not be used to avoid lockout/tryout. 
5.20.4 Lockout/tryout shall be used unless the division manager can demonstrate to the 
Health, Safety, and Security Manager that an alternative control provides equal or 
greater protection. When energy isolation is not used, approved alternative control 
shall be used. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 41 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 41 of 52 
5.20.5 There are three specific criteria to determine if the minor servicing exception would 
apply to a particular activity: 
 The activity must be conducted during normal production operations. 
 The activity must be: 
 
 Routine: The activity must be a regular course of procedure and follow established 
practices. 
 Repetitive: The activity must be regularly repeated as part of the production 
process. 
 Integral: The activity must be essential to the production process. 
5.20.6 Before alternative controls are used, the following shall be completed and approved 
per ANSI Z244.1-2016, The Control of Hazardous Energy Lockout and Alternative 
Controls: 
 A practicability/justification analysis per clause 8.2.1 (CCS-HSS-FRM-0009.0). 
 A risk assessment as per clause 8.2.2 (CCS-HSS-FRM-0010.0).  
 Other alternative control evaluations as described in clauses 8.2.3 – 8.2.14 (See 
Appendix A). 
5.20.7 Alternative controls shall be added to the safe job procedure (JSHA or JSA) if 
approved. 
5.20.8 There shall be a master list in each division of these approved alternative controls. 
5.20.9 Alternative controls must be under the exclusive control of the employee performing 
the minor servicing. 
5.20.10 These alternative controls must enable the employee to safely perform the servicing 
task without being exposed to the energization or activation of the equipment or the 
release of stored energy. 
5.20.11 If the minor servicing exception criteria are not met in full, this Standard is applicable, 
and the equipment or machinery must be de-energized. In addition, all potentially 
hazardous energy must be brought to a zero-energy state. 
5.21 Contract Workers (Contractors, Sub-Contractors, Service Providers) 
5.21.1 When contractors work at a Cleveland-Cliffs Steel facility, they must follow their written 
lockout/tryout standard and adhere to the Cleveland-Cliffs Steel Energy Isolation 
Standard.  
5.21.2 All contract workers must comply with these requirements, beginning with, but not 
limited to, having a red personal safety lock and lock identification. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 42 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 42 of 52 
5.21.3 Contract workers shall identify personal safety locks with employee and contractor 
company names. 
 Contract workers are permitted to use a durable tag with a grommet attached to the 
shank of their personal safety lock due to outages and utilization of travelers. 
5.21.4 Contract workers are not permitted to operate any energy isolation devices. Cleveland-
Cliffs Steel employees shall perform this task. A variance to this rule may be granted 
by the Plant General Manager and Health, Safety, and Security Manager after written 
safe procedure for performing the job are submitted and approved. 
5.21.5 This Energy Isolation Safety Standard will be distributed to our current contract 
workforce base through ISNetworld. However, each steel plant’s Health, Safety, and 
Security Department will be required to conduct or administer a face-to-face meeting 
on the subject with each contract company's representatives to: 
 Verify each contract company working at your facility has received a copy of the 
Standard. 
 Answer or record (to later answer) any comments, questions, or concerns. 
 Ensure (as much as possible) that each contract company is or will be conducting 
training on this Standard with their contract employees. 
5.21.6 Each facility’s employee/management committee will determine how to address 
training on this Standard for vendors, visitors, and contract workers not associated with 
ISNetworld. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 43 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 43 of 52 
6 Forms and Documented Information 
6.1 Documentation  
6.1.1 All activity defined within this Lockout/Tryout Standard shall be appropriately 
documented.  
6.1.2 All employees’ lockout/tryout training activities shall be recorded in your facility’s 
training database or another system. 
6.2 Energy Control Verification Procedure (CCS-HSS-FRM-0001.0) 
6.2.1 A written procedure that describes the verification steps to control the hazardous 
energy for each piece of equipment, industrial vehicle, or machinery. 
6.2.2 Maintain current records for the life of the machine or equipment. 
6.3 Group Lockout Box Control List (CCS-HSS-FRM-0002.0) 
6.3.1 A form for documenting authorized employees’ and contract workers’ names who 
placed or removed their personal safety lock from a group lockout box. 
6.3.2 Maintain the current record until all locks on this list are removed. 
6.4 Group Lockout Leader Evaluation Checklist (CCS-HSS-FRM-0003.0) 
6.4.1 A form for evaluating a potential Group Lockout Leader. 
6.4.2 Maintain record for employment of the employee. 
6.5 Training Log (CCS-HSS-FRM-0004.0) 
6.5.1 This training log is provided to record all training completed that is not documented by 
other written means such as a completion certificate or other written documentation. It 
can be used for observational, interaction, classroom, or hands-on training. 
6.5.2 There shall be a master list maintained in each division of authorized employees, 
group lockout leaders, second-person verifiers, and testers. The Training Log shall 
serve as the master list to manage training completion versus trying to find someone’s 
individual record if their training status is questioned. 
6.5.3 Maintain record for employment of the employees. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 44 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 44 of 52 
6.6 POST Activity Checklist (CCS-HSS-FRM-0005.0) 
6.6.1 Before removing the control lock from a group lockout box after maintenance and 
servicing are complete, this checklist must be completed and signed by a Cleveland-
Cliffs Steel responsible manager before releasing the equipment to operations. 
6.6.2 Maintain record for 1 year + current. 
6.7 Periodic Inspections of Energy Isolation Procedure & Alternative 
Controls (CCS-HSS-FRM-0006.0) 
6.7.1 Periodic Inspections are a requirement of OSHA and Cleveland-Cliffs Steel. This form 
is to help you evaluate compliance with the following requirements: 
6.7.1.1 Determine whether: 
 The steps in the energy control procedure are being followed. 
 The employees involved know their responsibilities under the procedure. 
 The procedure is adequate to provide the necessary protection and what changes 
are needed. 
6.7.1.2 Emphasize that the person performing the periodic inspection is an authorized 
employee (other than the one(s) utilizing the procedure being inspected). 
6.7.1.3 Determine if any deviations or inadequacies exist. 
 All deviations or inadequacies discovered by the inspections must be corrected 
and documented. 
6.7.1.4 Maintain records for 1 year + current. 
6.8 Safety Lock Removal Incident Form (CCS-HSS-FRM-0007.0) 
6.8.1 A safety lock removal incident form should only be used if the person who initiated the 
energy isolation cannot complete the lockout process and remove their lock. 
6.8.2 The decision for safety lock removal is made by management. 
6.8.3 Safety locks are to be removed ONLY by the division manager or a trained person 
authorized by the division manager in their absence. 
6.8.4 For record-keeping purposes, complete a Safety Lock Removal Incident Form. 
6.8.5 Maintain records for 1 year + current. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 45 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 45 of 52 
6.9 Energy Isolation Personal Protective Grounding Log (CCS-HSS-FRM-
0008.0) 
6.9.1 A form used to track installation and removal of personal protective grounding wires.  
6.9.2 Personal protective grounds go by several names in the industry: "temporary 
protective grounds," "ground sets," "ground clusters," or plain "grounds." Personal 
protective grounds are used whenever workers perform tasks on electrical power 
systems that may become reenergized for some reason by the reclosing of switches or 
circuit breakers, static voltages, and induced voltages in outdoor substations or lines 
and capacitive discharges. 
6.9.3 The use of personal protective grounding is covered by OSHA 1910.269(n), 
"Grounding for the Protection of Employees," and the NFPA (National Fire Protection 
Association) 70E Section 120.3, "Temporary Protective Grounding." Both sources 
contain very similar requirements. 
6.9.4 Maintain the current record until all grounds on this log are removed. 
6.10 Alternative Control – Practicability/Justification Form (CCS-HSS-
FRM-0009.0) 
6.10.1 The practicability and justification analysis results in a “go” or “no go” decision to 
lockout. 
6.10.2 If the practicability or justification analysis results demonstrate that a lockout is a viable 
option, then lockout shall be used. If the results indicate that lockout is not feasible and 
an alternative control is suitable for the application, continue to the Risk Assessment 
(ANSI/ASSP Z244.1) Form in CCS-HSS-FRM-0010.0. 
6.10.3 Maintain the current record for the life of the machine or equipment. 
6.11 Alternative Control – Risk Assessment Form (CCS-HSS-FRM-
0010.0) 
6.11.1 Perform a Risk Assessment. Here you will identify Risk Factors, Hazard(s), Risks, 
Control Measures, and Alternative Control Justification. 
6.11.2 Maintain the current record for the life of the machine or equipment. 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 46 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 46 of 52 
6.12 Appendix A – Other Applicable Evaluations for Alternative Control 
6.12.1 Industry Best Practices  
 Industry best practices represent a prevailing industry way of controlling hazardous 
energy. 
6.12.2 Architecture/Structure 
 A key consideration in evaluating the safety performance (reliability) of the alternative 
control involves the architecture or structure of the system. If components are used 
that are less than well-tried or less than well-tried designs are implemented, the 
architecture/structure can significantly improve the system’s reliability. 
6.12.3 Well-Tried Components 
 A well-tried component is a component that is either widely used in the past with 
successful results in similar applications or made and verified by the component 
manufacturer using principles that demonstrate its suitability and reliability for safety-
related applications. 
 The components used can be checked and verified on new machinery and 
equipment and existing equipment used in the field. Thus, both users and suppliers 
of machinery can verify the design of existing machinery in the field. 
6.12.4 Well-Tried Designs 
 A well-tried design is a system that has been demonstrated, based on an analysis of 
operational experience, for a specific configuration of an element to show that the 
likelihood of dangerous systematic faults is acceptably low. 
6.12.5 Common Cause Failure (CCF) 
 Common cause failures refer to a failure resulting from one or more events, causing 
concurrent failures of two or more separate elements in a redundant 
architecture/structure subsystem, leading to a dangerous failure. 
 A CCF usually results in two or more failures from a single event or cause. 
Therefore, the design should be assessed to establish the effectiveness of the 
measures used to safeguard against CCF. 
6.12.6 Fault Tolerance 
 Fault tolerance pertains to the ability of an alternative control to achieve a safe state 
in the event of a fault. Faults can include leaking valves, electrical shorts, contactors 
welding shut, mechanical fractures/breakage, overheating components, and 
environmental exposure. 
 Fault tolerance is determined by the circuit’s architecture and is defined as 
categories and performance levels in ISO 13849-1 or “Control Reliability” as defined 
in ANSI B11.19. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 47 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 47 of 52 
6.12.7 Exclusivity or Individual Control 
 Examples include, but are not limited to: 
 Locks 
 Size of working zone 
 Proximity to control stations, pendants, or devices 
 Locking devices 
 Passwords 
 Enabling devices 
 Hold to run controls 
 Trapped key systems 
 Presence sensing devices (under some conditions) 
 Interlock blocking device 
 RFID systems 
 Factors that reduce exclusivity shall be considered in alternate risk reduction 
measures 
 Examples include, but are not limited to: 
 Key reproducibility 
 Manual manipulation of controls or devices 
 Password protection and management 
 Visibility of the hazardous area from the reset location (line of sight) 
6.12.8 Tamper Resistance 
 Whereas exclusivity pertains to a person’s ability to control the release of energy, 
tamper resistance refers to the ability of a person to tamper intentionally, resulting in 
a system inadvertently energizing or releasing energy. A lock exhibits good tamper 
resistance due to the physical properties of the lock. Tagout has less tamper 
resistance as defeating a plastic zip tie requires less force and more easily obtained 
tools (for example, pliers versus bolt cutters). A warning or tag exhibits even less 
tamper resistance. 
 Selection of system components may also serve to resist tampering (bypass, 
jumpering, defeat of interlocks, etc.). 
 The physical layout of the equipment may achieve tamper resistance. For example, 
restricting access to areas is another form of physical layout that improves tamper 
resistance. 
 The physical configuration of components may also achieve tamper resistance. 
Designs that limit or prohibit mechanical manipulation of the controls improve tamper 
resistance. 
 Tamper resistance need not be physical. For example, passwords that restrict 
access represent another form of tamper resistance. 
 Another form of tamper resistance is technical sophistication or complexity. Tamper 
resistance is improved if bypassing a system requires having access to, and being 
able to read, the system schematics. Systems requiring specialized skills to operate 
have greater tamper resistance than those without. 
 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 48 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 48 of 52 
6.12.9 Program to Support 
 The documentation of the tasks which may be performed using a specific alternative 
control is intended to prevent task creep. 
6.12.10 Procedures in Place 
 The procedures in place to support an alternative control shall be evaluated. 
Alternative controls shall include developing, documenting, and using 
procedures when affected persons are engaged in activities requiring the 
control of hazardous energy. 
6.12.11 Periodic Check and Test 
 Where alternative controls are used to control hazardous energy, the need for 
checking is especially important because, over time, equipment, operations, and 
work methods can change in small and large ways. Without a program that requires 
periodic checking and testing, alternative controls can become outdated to the point 
that they no longer provide adequate protection. 
 Checking and testing shall also include correcting any deviations or inadequacies 
identified. 
6.12.12 Review by a Qualified Person 
 The persons developing the alternative control should use due diligence throughout 
the process to achieve high confidence in the results. Confidence can be improved 
by consulting others with the appropriate knowledge and expertise and having other 
qualified persons review the design. 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 49 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 49 of 52 
6.13 Appendix B – Lockout/Tryout Implementation Flow Diagram 
 
 
  


--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 50 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 50 of 52 
6.14 Appendix C – Functional Lockout Flowchart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Yes 
Is system or  
equipment in 
operation? 
No 
Isolate all energy sources 
Turn off all operating controls 
Identify the type(s) and magnitude of energy 
Notify all affected employees 
Follow normal cycle stop 
or shut down process 
Equipment or process needs 
maintenance or service where a 
lockout is required 
No Is system 
properly locked 
out & tried 
out? Yes 
  Equipment or process is now locked out 
Verify zero energy state by attempting to start-up the operation: 
 Note: Make sure that no personnel are exposed to process 
 Watch for movement 
 Check for lights on control panel that may indicate equipment is still active 
 Listen for sounds that may indicate the presence of energy 
 Return operating controls to “OFF” or “NEUTRAL” position 
Dissipate or restrain 
stored or residual energy 
Lockout the energy isolation devices     with 
assigned department locks, then verify the locks 
Yes Is there a potential 
for stored or 
residual energy? 
No 

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 51 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 51 of 52 
7 Opportunities and Risks 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- SOURCE PDF PAGE 52 ---
Energy Isolation Safety Standard   
 
For reference only.   Invalid if printed.  
Page 52 of 52 
8 Revision History  
 
 
Rev. Date Section Paragraph Summary  
of change Authorized by 
0 9-1-2022 Harmonized 
Standard 
Requirements 
and Template 
Harmonized 
Standard 
Requirements 
and Template 
The initial issue of the 
CCS Standard for 
Energy Control 
K. D. Berard 
      
      
  